In a way, science is really the study of life. Everything we see, hear, smell, touch, and even think is science in some form. Life is science, and life is fascinating. It is unexplainable and seemingly impossible in so many ways. Science provides explanations for some of the most incomprehensible aspects of life.

Neuroscience, the study of the brain and the nervous system, gives us insight into the complex mechanisms that shape the way that we think and act. The thoughts that we think are the foundation of our entire reality and are responsible for how we view the world around us. 

Every thought and emotion that we have ever had has been derived from a network of over 86 billion neurons in our brain. Neurons communicate with each other using both electrical impulses and various chemicals called neurotransmitters. This neural network is being used in a unique way for each thought, emotion and experience that we have throughout the day.

Each neuron in this network is made up of 4 main components: dendrites, cell bodies, axons, and synapses.

Dendrites are the starting point for all neurons. Receptors on the dendrites absorb neurotransmitters which then cause positively or negatively charged ions to be sent to the neuron’s cell body. As the ions accumulate in the cell body an electrical potential is built up. When a certain threshold of electrical potential is reached the cell body will fire an electrical impulse down the axon to the axon terminals. These terminals will then release neurotransmitters into the synapse, which is the empty space between an axon terminal and the dendrite of the next neuron in the chain.

 

In order for these neurotransmitters to be released a few things happen in the axon terminals. As a result of an axon terminal receiving electrical impulses from the cell body, calcium is released in the terminal. This calcium controls the flow of neurotransmitters that leave the axon terminals into the synapse. The amount of calcium that is released is proportional to the frequency of the electrical impulses coming from the cell body and the amount of neurotransmitters released is proportional to the amount of calcium that is released. This process repeats in different areas of the brain when we are thinking. Even some of the simplest thoughts that we have are the result of hundreds of thousands of neurons firing simultaneously so it is all happening very quickly. 

It is possible to think as fast as we do because over time the brain gets more efficient in how it operates. When a thought is processed in the brain or a piece of information is learned it becomes easier and faster to recall this same thought or piece of information the next time it is needed. There are a few reasons why this happens. 

One of the reasons is that the synapses between these neurons are getting stronger each time the neuron fires. Synapse strengthening means that more neurotransmitter receptors start to appear on the dendrites as a result of consistent and repetitive neuron firing. The increase in neurotransmitters that are able to enter the dendrites because of the added receptors increases the amount of charged ions entering the cell body which allows the cell body to fire more frequently with less effort. Another reason thoughts get easier and faster to recall is because of something called a myelin sheath that surrounds the axons. As the action potential from the cell body is fired along the axon to the axon terminals the myelin sheath acts as an electrical insulator around the axon which allows the action potential to travel to the axon terminals faster without losing as much electrical charge. This myelin sheath is built up as a result of frequent neuron firing. The more electrical charge reaching the terminals means the more calcium in the terminals and therefore the more neurotransmitters released into the synapse to be picked up by the dendrite of the next neuron which then strengthens this next synapse too. 

The brain also favours neural connections and circuits that have proven to lead to successful outcomes in the past. If the brain tried to use the full extent of the neural network every time it wanted to process a thought it would be very inefficient. Narrowing down which neural connections have led to success in the past and then using these same connections again is how we improve at things. These specific groups of neural connections that form thoughts and skills are called neural circuits. Remember that with every thought and skill there are thousands and sometimes millions of neuron connections involved in a single circuit. Therefore, in order to truly master a skill or way of thinking, it takes a lot of trial and error for the brain to narrow down which connections will produce the most successful outcomes. This is the reason people get better at things with practice and it is also the reason that studying allows you to recall information when it is needed.

When the brain needs to make judgements and decisions that it doesn't have previous information for it will rely on other sources to provide this information. This is especially the case during childhood when children look to others to provide answers. A lot of the strongest neural circuits are formed in childhood and for this reason it is extremely important to help a child develop neural circuits that will benefit them in the future. 

Researchers have found that between ages 2 and 6 is when a child’s personality and general way of thinking develops most. A significantly greater number of synapse connections between neurons are being made in this age range compared to adulthood. This initial network is very plastic and very inefficient. As a child ages and starts to develop thinking patterns through repetition this network becomes more rigid and more efficient. At first there are millions of connections constantly being made and broken within the child's brain. Over time certain synapses in the brain continue to be strengthened as a result of frequent use and other synapses are disconnected if they aren’t used enough. The disconnection of synapses is called synaptic pruning, referred to as forgetting.

Rapidly evolving circuits in a child’s brain during early development is why a combination of bad parenting and unpredictable circumstances can permanently affect that individual for the rest of their life.

Synapses can be strengthened in adulthood, this is how we remember things and learn, but it is one thing to form a memory and a very different thing to attempt to restructure the circuits that are responsible for personality and specific ways of thinking. Anyone that has tried to change parts of their thought process or personality in adulthood has found this out. The reason that it is so difficult is because after a person has been thinking a certain way for an extended period of time their synapses become so strong that it takes a lot of repetition to weaken the unwanted connections and strengthen the more desirable ones. It is still very possible to change the structure of these circuits, people do it all the time, I have done it for certain things, it just takes a lot of effort and a lot of repetition to break those pre-existing connections and form new ones. The way this is done is by not thinking or behaving in a way that stimulates the unwanted connections and constantly trying to think and act in a way that will allow the wanted connections to be stimulated. This will cause the unwanted connections to be broken or weakened at their synapses through synaptic pruning due to the reduced usage while the wanted connections are being strengthened simultaneously because of the consistent firing of the neurons.  

This is why I believe parenting is so important, especially at an early age. A parent is shaping the way their children think of themselves and the world around them. The information and experiences provided to children by the parents plays a significant role in a child's development. This can be beneficial to a developing child if they are presented with information and experiences that allow them to develop positive thoughts and behaviours but it can also be catastrophic depending on parenting styles, and the situations that the child is exposed to growing up. 

I think it’s possible that children only act and think in a truly creative and independent way as they navigate through life until the age of around 6 because after this age they start to really understand what language is and they start to understand what people are saying to them about how they should act and what they should believe in. After they start understanding this information better they start using the information as a foundation for new thoughts. After this foundation of basic thoughts and beliefs are established it will influence every subsequent thought in the future. As this foundation of neural circuits gets stronger it becomes very hard to restructure.