For thousands of years people have turned to religion for answers. It is only recently that there has been a shift in some people’s beliefs and opinions on religion as a whole. More people than ever before have started to identify as agnostic or atheist when it comes to god and religion and I believe this trend will continue until religion is eventually phased out of society. 

There is new scientific data being introduced every day that is based on evidence while at the same time, year after year, there has been no evidence brought forward to support religious claims. It is no wonder why people have become less inclined to take religion seriously. Given the choice between fact or faith it seems obvious to rely on fact and I will explain my thoughts on this when it comes to religion.

To start with I will provide some information about the four most prevalent religions around the world today: Hinduism, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam.


Hinduism:
Hinduism, the oldest of the four main religions, is likely the result of strong animistic beliefs of different groups of people developing into one religion over time. These shared beliefs spread throughout India and other forms of Hinduism, such as Buddhism, spread throughout China. Hindu religion has no single founder or scripture for people to strictly follow and Hindus do not have to live their lives being obedient to one god. Each individual can decide for themselves what they choose to believe in and how they choose to live their life without having to fear punishment for these choices. 

Judaism, Christianity and Islam:
Judaism is what is known as a monotheistic religion, which is a religion that believes in a single all-powerful god. The Jewish people believe that God created the earth and everything that is living. The Old Testament says that Adam and Eve were the first two humans on earth. They were created by god and then tasked with populating the rest of the world. 

As the population on earth grew it is said that humans started living lives full of sin and greed. God saw this as behaviour that was punishable by death. He called upon Noah, a man who had always been loyal to him, and commanded him to build an ark. This ark was to be made large enough to hold a breeding pair of every animal species on earth as well as Noah's family. The ark supposedly took a little less than 100 years for Noah and his family to build. Upon completion, god flooded the earth and no one outside of the ark survived. A year later the flood waters began to dissipate and the ark headed to the nearest land mass. 

The 8 people on the ark were the only survivors and were then tasked with populating the earth once again. Abraham, a descendant of one of these 8 survivors, settled in the land of Canaan and this is where he formed the covenant with god that marked the beginning of the Jewish religion. This covenant was an agreement that Abraham and his descendants would obey god and in return god would give them guidance, protection and the land of Canaan, which is known as Palestine today. 

God told Abraham that him and his wife Sarah would have a child. This child would produce many more descendants and build great nations throughout Canaan. Abraham’s wife was too old to have children so she volunteered her slave Hagar to take her place in conceiving the child. Hagar and Abraham’s child was named Ishmael. God told Abraham that he would provide Ishmael with a great nation of his own one day but Abraham would still have another son with Sarah in order to truly fulfill the covenant. 

At the age of 99 Abraham and his wife, aged 90, were successful in conceiving a child. This baby was named Issac and he went on to generate many descendants including Jesus Christ, the creator of the Christian religion. 

Over 600 years after the birth of Jesus, Muhammad was born in Mecca, Saudi Arabia. Muhammad was a descendant of Ishmael, the son of Hagar and Abraham, and the creator of the Islam religion. The story says that Muhammad was visited by an angel named Gabriel in a cave and this angel made Muhammad read what are now verses in the Quran. The rest of the Quran was given to Muhammad by Gabriel over a period of 23 years and by the year 630 AD Muhammad had unified most of Arabia under the religion of Islam.



From these stories we can vaguely see how the four main religions of the world were established. What is not clear though, is the reason that these religions were formed and why people still follow them to this day. One can argue the legitimacy of the stories above based on faith alone. These stories can be better analyzed in that respect by reading the scriptures of each religion but what I will try to analyze is the legitimacy of these religions based on logic. 

Before people started having faith in religions like these there was no talk of god and no scriptures to tell people how to live their lives. Early humans, referred to as hunter-gatherers, spent their days hunting, collecting food and trying to keep safe from dangerous animals. Research has shown that these hunter-gatherer tribes first had beliefs about supernatural forces in nature, called animism, which then evolved into a belief in an afterlife, shamanism, and ancestor worship over many years. 

Each tribe had different beliefs and these beliefs evolved as time went on. Monotheistic religions didn’t begin to form until hunter-gatherer tribes started getting larger and these gods were not always manufactured to be involved in people’s lives. Inactive gods were looked at as powerful beings or creators of the universe but inactive in human affairs and non-punishing when it came to human morality. Active gods, who dictate how people are supposed to behave, became more and more popular over time and as groups of hunter-gatherers continued to grow. The fact that these active gods only started to appear as groups got larger could be attributed to the fact that as groups get larger they become harder to control. The guidance of monotheistic religion would have been a useful tool to better control a population. It is hard to challenge a leader that doesn’t really exist, especially when this leader threatens eternal suffering for anyone that disobeys.

Once the size of a particular religion reached a critical mass within a large group of people it would have become very difficult for any other religious beliefs to be accepted within that society. The societies with the largest populations would have also been the most powerful and likely the most successful in imposing their beliefs on smaller groups of people. The result was widespread belief in a few large religions as opposed to many different beliefs within small tribes as was seen in the past.

Over time the foundations of these larger religions have remained unchanged but new religions with mostly the same fundamental concepts have formed to incorporate new beliefs. This can be seen when we look at how many different forms of Christianity are in existence today; the catholic, pentecostal, and lutheran denominations for example. 

To me the fact that each tribe of hunter-gatherers had different spiritual beliefs and practices until bigger civilizations began to form should suggest that if these bigger civilizations were to never form the worldwide religions that we know of today would have never evolved into what they are. Knowing this we can pretty accurately predict that if all religious information in existence was gathered up today and destroyed, this information would not return to us in the same form 500 years from now. This can not be said about the laws of science that we operate under. 

Laws of science are not something that can be changed based on what we think would benefit us most at a given point in time. If this was the case we would be able to breath underwater, teleport to the grocery store, and live for hundreds of years without modifying the foundation of our biology. These things might be useful but we know that they are impossible. 

The laws of science that we know of today were around long before the earth was able to support life. These same laws are applicable on all other planets within our solar system, within other galaxies and throughout the entire universe. The very existence of life is dependent on the unwavering predictability of science. Knowing this makes some of the stories talked about in religions scriptures extremely hard to believe.

Genesis 1 for example, the scripture that Judaism is based on, begins with Adam and Eve. These two people were said to have been created by god and were given the responsibility of populating the entire earth. Right away we know that this has to be false information, magic aside, based on the fact that two people can not possibly be responsible for producing a population of this size. There is nowhere near enough genetic diversity available between two people to create a healthy population of this scale. Severe genetic mutations and diseases would result due to widespread inbreeding. 

Another claim in these religions is that certain people, such as Noah, sometimes lived for hundreds of years. Noah was said to be around 950 years old when he died and there were supposedly others that lived longer: Jared (962), Methuselah (969). Noah would have been 500 years old when he had his first child. Abraham would have had his second child at the age of 99 and then continued to live for 74 more years. His wife Sarah was 90 at the time of their son Issac’s birth, which again is not possible due to the infertility of men and women after a certain age. 

These are just a few out of many instances where the stories in religious scriptures defy the scientific laws. When you think of the instances when the laws of science were broken in these stories an obvious conclusion that a lot more people can come to now is that the people that told the stories might not have been not telling the truth. People make up stories every day. A law of science has yet to be broken in recorded history even one single time. Religious people will defend their own religion no matter how high the evidence is stacked against them and at the same time will also completely discount any other forms of religion without a second thought. Scientists are open minded, they just know the facts. 

The stories in Judaism and Islam are predicated on people claiming to have had communications with god when no one else was around. Abraham and Muhammad, for example, said that they were either visited by god or by an angel of god and were given instructions to spread gods messages. Why wouldn’t god spread god’s messages? 

If Abraham and Muhammad were alive in this generation and tried to spread the word of their encounters with god they would never be taken seriously, yet religion is based solely on faith in these exact same stories told by people thousands of years ago. 

No one is religious until the people around them start to teach them the stories of religion. A child with Islam parents, adopted into a Catholic family would most likely grow up believing in Catholicism, if any religion at all. How can religion A say that religion B is false while religion B is saying the same thing about religion A with the same amount of certainty? If one religion is false then wouldn’t this be an indication that they are all false?

Christians can argue that they were a religion first so Islam is therefore incorrect, but the same can be said about Christianity when it is compared to Judaism, and then again when Judaism is compared to all of the other religions of early hunter-gatherer tribes that have been forgotten or changed over time. The earliest signs of religious activity took place over 100,000 years ago and since then the world has seen many forms of religion. The monuments and worship sites of Göbekli Tepe, Stonehenge, and the Egyptian Pyramids are reminders of these forgotten religions.

A modern example of how religious practices are still being evolved can be seen in Catholicism's evolution from the original Christian religion. The main difference between these two religions is that Catholics believe that every choice a person makes in their lives is taken into consideration when they die and these life choices determine if they will go to heaven or hell. They also believe in the pope being God's representative on earth. Anything that he says regarding faith or morals is expected to be listened to and followed with no objections. Christians on the other hand, believe that as long as you have faith that Jesus is real and as long as you accept him in your life before you die you will go to heaven. They also do not believe in the pope being a representative of God. 

It seems like what really differentiates the Catholic from Christian churches is that the Catholic church has more power and control over its followers. This seems to be by design considering there is no mention of a pope anywhere in the bible and considering people are expected to live their lives exactly as the church wants them to or else they are risking going to hell.

This increased desire for control has been a trend in religion that has continued throughout the course of history. Hunter-gatherers began with shared animistic and spiritual thoughts which then evolved into much more in depth religious beliefs over time. Hinduism is the oldest of the four main religions and these people have the highest level of control of their lives. This is especially true when you compare Hinduism to the more modern religions such as Islam and Catholicism. 

If there is clear evidence of past religious beliefs being created, evolving and then being forgotten as time goes on, can't we assume that the religions in modern times aren’t all that different from the hundreds of other religious or spiritual beliefs that have faded away in the past? Modern religions have become more solidified throughout history because of population growth and now social norms but I don’t believe this really makes them any different than the beliefs of early humans in terms of their content. Religions of the past were forgotten and have never resurfaced. As more and more people stop relying so heavily on religion we could soon see our modern religions fade away as well.



I do understand the need people have to create and follow beliefs that can explain the uncertainties they have about life. I too find it hard to believe that there is no purpose to our existence. How can something so bizarre and unexplainable, yet so flawless in its operation, be merely a random and pointless concept that we will never have an answer for? How could something so random and meaningless allow us to generate the complex thoughts that we think of on a daily basis or the complex innovations we have created in the world around us? How can we live during one point in time and then be not living during another point in time with no indication that not living is ever anything other than not living? These are some of the hardest questions that every human faces and religions claim to have the only answers.

In my opinion it is naive to suggest anything more than a theory as an answer to these questions without having proof of the theories. Maybe there is a purpose to life and maybe the universe has been created in some way, but there is not any information out there that would make me believe that I need to live my life according to anybody else’s theories or beliefs on this subject. For people to live their lives based on stories told by people that lived thousands of years ago, stories with absolutely no reliable evidence and stories that contain information known today to be impossible, seems very strange.