More and more time went by and it was increasingly obvious that I had made a big mistake. As a newly graduated power engineer, 4 months into my first job, making more money than some people ever do, I was bored. Bored of the monotonous routines, bored of the meetings and bored of the small talk. This was not what I wanted to do with my life.

It was like I was stuck in a 12 hour long period of dejavu every day. Each shift was the same as the one before and I had no interest in any of it. The days dragged on and all I could think about was how badly I wanted them to be over. Was this it? Was I going to spend the rest of my life wishing my days would go by faster? In my opinion life is way too short to want time to go by faster. It was clear that I needed to find something that interested me and that journey started the day I told my supervisor I was quitting.

After quitting my job I spent the following year really getting to know my interests and figuring out what I wanted from life. I backpacked around Europe, was involved in the start and end of a business and worked as a server in one of the most amazing cities in Canada, barely able to pay bills. I felt freedom that I had never experienced before and it didn’t matter how much income I could have been earning as a power engineer. All that mattered was deciding what I wanted for my future and figuring out the best way to get there. I explored a wide range of fascinating topics, researched countless career paths and spent months pondering my options. As a result, I have opened myself up to a world full of possibilities and have discovered interests that I plan on pursuing for the rest of my life. 

To me there is no better feeling than having a vision for your future that makes you excited to start the day and sad to go to sleep at night. Taking the initial steps away from the situation I was unsatisfied with turned out to be the best thing that I have ever done. I have learned to trust my instincts and to not let fear or vulnerability stop me from trying to better my life. After looking back on everything I have put myself through I am happy to say that my biggest worry now is that time is going by too fast, not too slow.